hey this is pressure Locker this puzzle
consists of two parts first how many
rectangles are there in this grid second
how many rectangles are there in this
grid these two challenges were asked on
the TV show super human hosted by cow
pen the contestant summer was able to
answer each challenge in about 10
seconds each given the number of
possibilities it would seem you would
have to be a savant to count all of
these rectangles that quickly but in
fact any human can solve these problems
with the super power of mathematics in
this video I will teach you a trick to
solve these problems can you figure them
out give these problems a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
the solution let me first go over the
answers in the first problem there are
675 rectangles in this grid for the
second problem there are 900 rectangles
in this grid so how can we count all of
these rectangles if you start out with
the first problem and you try and count
manually you'll quickly see that it's
impractical it's a method that's prone
to error and it will take a long time so
we need to come up with a more
systematic way of counting the number of
rectangles the key insight is that every
rectangle can be uniquely described by
the two distinct horizontal lines and
two distinct vertical lines that bound
the rectangle so let me draw a rectangle
in this grid and you'll notice that this
rectangle is bound by two different
horizontal lines and two different
vertical lines now we could take this
insight in Reverse as well every pair of
two distinct horizontal lines and two
distinct vertical lines will uniquely
define a rectangle if we take another
pair of horizontal lines and vertical
lines
this will also bound a rectangle and
this will be true of every single pair
of horizontal lines and every single
pair of vertical lines so we can put
these insights together to say that we
can count all of the rectangles by
counting the number of ways to pick two
distinct horizontal lines and two
distinct vertical lines a shorthand I'll
say that two distinct horizontal lines
plus two distinct vertical lines count a
rectangle so now the problem reduces to
how many ways can we pick two distinct
horizontal lines and two distinct
vertical lines to do that we'll first
count the number of horizontal lines in
this grid there are six then we count
the number of vertical lines in this
grid and there are 10 so we have six
horizontal lines and ten vertical lines
now before I get to the calculation I
want to make one caveat some of you will
be tempted to count the number of
rectangles in the grid but notice there
are five rectangles in the rows and nine
rectangles in the columns so if you
count the number of rectangles make sure
that you add one to count the number of
lines that are in the grid so how many
different ways can we pick horizontal
lines for a pair of horizontal lines
there will be six different
possibilities for the first line let's
suppose that I pick the third line now
how many ways are there to pick the
second line well as I've already picked
one of these lines there are only five
possibilities that remain so there will
be five possibilities for the second
line so we can multiply 6 times 5 to get
that there are 30 different ordered
pairs of lines but we are only
interested in unordered pairs so we need
to divide by 2 why do we divide by 2
well if you look at ordered pairs the
pair 3 and 4 will be the same as 4 3
because they will both be representing
the lines three and four so in the
ordered pairs we basically have
duplicates of every single unordered
pair so the number of unordered pairs
will be 30 divided by 2 which is 15 now
there's a shortcut to this it comes up
in many combinatorics problems
we can count the number of ways to pick
two of the horizontal lines as a
binomial coefficient 6 choose 2 which
equals 6 times 5 divided by 2 which
equals 15 pairs of horizontal lines
furthermore we can pick the number of
vertical lines in the same method there
are 10 choose 2 which equals 10 times I
divided by 2 which equals 45 pairs of
vertical lines so now the total number
of rectangles will be the total number
of horizontal pairs that we can pick
times the total number of vertical pairs
of lines that we can pick so this will
be 15 times 45 which equals 675
rectangles so you know the trick to
solve this problem but I still think
that under pressure counting the number
of lines calculating these binomial
coefficients and then multiplying them
together is still a remarkable thing
that the contested it now in order to
solve any type of problem we'll have to
generalize let's suppose that there are
8 horizontal lines and B vertical lines
will have a choose two pairs of
horizontal lines and we'll have V choose
two pairs of vertical lines we
multiplied these possibilities to get H
to 2 times V choose 2 to get the total
number of rectangles in a grid of H
horizontal lines and V vertical lines so
now the question is how do we solve the
second problem how many rectangles are
there in this l-shaped grid this is a
trickier problem suppose you take two
distinct horizontal lines and two
distinct vertical lines now it's not
true that every pair of horizontal lines
and pair of vertical lines will bound a
rectangle as you can see in this
example these pairs do not bound a
rectangle in this l-shaped grid so we
have to count a bit more carefully what
we can do is we can use our solution
method from problem 1 and adapt it for
this l-shaped grid now suppose we look
just at this blue grid this will be a
grid just like in problem 1 and in just
this grid every pair of 2 horizontal
lines and 2 vertical lines will form a
rectangle this blue grid has 11
horizontal lines and 5 vertical lines
but this is just a portion of our
l-shaped grid we need to consider the
rest of the grid so how do we do that
well we can consider another part of the
grid in this yellow grid every pair of
two horizontal lines and two vertical
lines will also form a rectangle this
yellow grid has five horizontal lines
and 10 vertical lines so we can put
these two together to count the entire
shape but the blue and yellow grids
overlap in a green grid of five by five
lines so the rectangles in this portion
of the grid will be double counted so to
compensate we then need to subtract out
the rectangles just in this green grid
so it's a much more complicated process
but we can solve this problem if we go
step by step so first we count the
number of rectangles in this blue grid
this will be 11 choose 2 x 5 choose 2
which equals 550 we then count the
number of rectangles in the yellow grid
which will be 5 choose 2 times 10 choose
2 and neck equals 450 we finally have to
count the number of rectangles in the
green grid and that'll be 5 choose 2
times 5 choose 2 which is 100 so now
let's count the number of rectangles we
need to take the number of rectangles in
the blue grid add it to the number of
rectangles in the yellow grid and then
subtract it from the number of
rectangles in the green grid which were
double counted so we
ultimately have 550 plus for 50-100 and
Dec gets to the answer of 900 so solving
this problem under pressure is even more
remarkable you have to divide the shape
into different grids if to count the
number of lines in each grid then you
have to calculate all those binomial
coefficients and keep track of the
addition and subtraction to finally get
to the correct answer of 900 did you
figure these problems out thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math you can
catch her on my blog mind your decisions
that you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch her on social
media at pressure Locker and if you like
this video please check out my books
there are links in the video description